GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
For more than half-a-century,
the sight of
a U.S. president here in Havana
would have
been unimaginable.
GWEN IFILL: Moving to defuse
decades of hostility,
President Obama meets with Cuban
President
Raul Castro in a historic trip
to the communist
island.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
foreign policy
in focus. Candidates lay out
their vision
for the United States in the
world ahead of
tomorrow's presidential
primaries.
GWEN IFILL: And a rare look deep
in Colombia's
jungles, as FARC rebels emerge
after decades
of war and hiding.
BORIS, FARC (through
translator): We're preparing
ourselves here for political
battle, to get
ready for a new environment. We
will pick
up cameras and drop our arms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The end of one
era, the beginning
of another. President Obama held
direct talks
today with the leader of Cuba in
his capital
city. And they took questions,
something the
communist government rarely
allows.
It was a moment that made
history, "The Star-Spangled
Banner" played for an American
president in
the heart of Havana. Mr. Obama
stood side
by side with Cuban President
Raul Castro in
the city no U.S. leader had
visited in 88
years.
Later, they emerged from a
private meeting
to describe their summit.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
For more than half-a-century,
the sight of
a U.S. president here in Havana
would have
been unimaginable. But this is a
new day.
Es un nuevo dia.
RAUL CASTRO, Cuban President
(through translator):
Today, I reaffirm that we should
exercise
the art of civilized
coexistence, which involves
accepting and respecting
differences and preventing
these from becoming the center
of our relationship.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the issue of
human rights
quickly interjected itself.
CNN reporter Jim Acosta, a
Cuban-American,
apparently struck a nerve when
he asked Castro
about political prisoners.
RAUL CASTRO (through
translator): Give me
of can give me a list of the
political prisoners,
and I will release them
immediately. Just
mention a list. If we have those
political
prisoners, they will be released
before tonight
ends.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact,
yesterday, just hours
ahead of Mr. Obama's arrival,
Cuban officials
detained dozens of dissidents.
Back at today's
briefing, President Obama
acknowledged differences
on the issue, but said he
believes a constructive
dialogue is possible.
BARACK OBAMA: As I think we both
indicated,
we had a very frank conversation
around issues
of democracy and human rights.
Our starting
point is that we have two
different systems.
But as is true with countries
around the world
where we have normalized
relations, we will
continue to stand up for basic
principles
that we believe in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Obama visit
is the product
of more than a year of work to
thaw relations.
During that time, embassies in
both countries
have reopened, with some
economic and trade
barriers lifted.
Already, there's been an influx
of American
tourists and business interests
to the island
nation. Coinciding with the
trip, Mr. Obama
announced Google will work to
expand Internet
coverage in Cuba, and he met
with American
and Cuban entrepreneurs.
Separately, American hotel chain
Starwood
said it will begin operating in
Havana soon.
But referring to the commercial
opening, President
Castro said today it's not
enough, and he
pointed again to the decades-old
U.S. trade
embargo on Cuba, which Congress
has refused
to abolish.
RAUL CASTRO (through
translator): Much more
could be done if the U.S.
blockade were lifted.
The most recent measures adopted
by the Obama
administration are positive, but
insufficient.
The blockade remains enforced,
and it contains
discouraging elements and
intimidating effects
and extraterritorial outreach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Castro also
called again for
the U.S. to return the
Guantanamo Naval Base
site to Cuban control.
Despite such disagreements,
there were also
gestures of goodwill. President
Obama laid
a wreath this morning at a
memorial for Cuban
independence hero Jose Marti.
And on Sunday,
despite a steady rain, the first
family toured
old Havana, as hundreds of
people looked on.
WOMAN (through translator): It
was very emotional,
very emotional. It was good. We
Cubans here,
as always, are happy and joyful
to receive
him. May this all be for good,
retaining our
full identity.
CLARISA PEREZ, Cuba (through
translator):
I don't disagree with his coming
to the island,
but, well, what I want is that
changes be
for the benefit of the Cuban
people, because
we are going through a difficult
economic
time here. There is no milk. We
are mistreated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
plans to meet
with opposition figures tomorrow
before a
baseball game between the Cuban
national team
and Major League Baseball's
Tampa Bay Rays.
We will get a report from the
scene in Havana,
and analyze the Obama visit,
after the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: Europe's
deal with Turkey to stem the
flow of migrants
and begin returning thousands
showed no sign
today of taking effect just yet.
Nearly 50,000
people, many from Syria, are now
stranded
in Greece.
But Greek Prime Minister Alexis
Tsipras said
he needs logistical help to
process and return
new arrivals.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through
translator): We have ahead of us
a hill to
climb because the implementation
of that agreement
will not be an easy matter. I
think that we
avoided the worst. If there
wasn't an agreement
and cooperation with Turkey, we
would have
found ourselves facing a domino,
one-sided
conclusion.
GWEN IFILL: Turkish monitors
arrived on some
Greek islands today. France,
Germany and the
Netherlands have also pledged to
help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The hunt is on in
Turkey for
three suspects believed to be
planning more
suicide attacks in the name of
the Islamic
State. It follows a weekend
bombing that killed
four people in Istanbul's
busiest pedestrian
shopping street. Funerals for
the dead began
today. Three of those killed
were Israeli.
Two held dual citizenship with
the U.S., and
the fourth was Iranian.
GWEN IFILL: Russia's prime
minister today
ordered officials to look into
tougher flight
safety rules after a deadly
crash. All 62
people aboard died Saturday when
a FlyDubai
airliner went down in Southern
Russia as it
tried to land in strong winds.
Since then,
search crews have combed the
snow-covered
wreckage for clues. Russian
officials say
the black box recorders were
badly damaged,
but they have been able to
recover some data.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. military
now confirms
that American Marines have
established a small
artillery base in Northern Iraq.
It's the
first time since U.S. forces
returned to Iraq
in 2014.
On Saturday, a Marine was killed
at the base
near Makhmour by Islamic State
rocket fire.
But a U.S. spokesman said today
it is not
a combat mission.
COL. STEVE WARREN, U.S.
Spokesman for Operation
Against ISIS: What they're there
to do is
simply shoot back if somebody
shoots at them
or at the forces in Makhmour.
So, they won't
kind of go off and conduct any
type of mission
on their own. They don't really
have that
capability anyway.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The colonel says
the Marine
base was fired on again today,
but no one
was hurt.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, a new fight
over drawing congressional
districts for political
gain went before the U.S.
Supreme Court, at
issue, whether Virginia
lawmakers illegally
packed black voters into one
district to help
Republican candidates in
neighboring districts.
The vacancy on the Supreme Court
means a 4-to-4
tie would uphold a lower court
ruling against
those districts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two largest
daily fantasy
sports Web sites in the U.S.
will, for now,
stop taking bets in New York
state. DraftKings
and FanDuel reached agreement
today with the
state attorney general. They're
going to let
the New York state legislature
resolve their
legal dispute. At issue is
whether the sites
promote gambling.
GWEN IFILL: New England braced
today for a
spring snowstorm that mostly
failed to deliver.
Forecasts had called for up to a
foot of snow
in places. Instead, about six
inches fell
across much of Eastern
Massachusetts, Rhode
Island and Northeastern
Connecticut. Boston
saw only three inches, but they
still closed
schools. Boston's had about 30
inches of snow
this winter, after getting 100
inches last
year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street
opened the week
with a fairly quiet day. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 21 points to
close near 17624.
The Nasdaq rose 13 points, and
the S&P 500
added two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a new era
of U.S.-Cuba relations;
presidential candidates
make their case to the
pro-Israel lobby; Colombian
rebels emerge from the jungle in
hopes of
peace; and much more.
GWEN IFILL: Now we turn to the
view from the
ground in Cuba during this
historic visit.
It comes from the BBC's Laura
Trevelyan, who
is reporting from Havana
tonight.
So, Laura, how has the U.S.
president been
received on the ground there?
LAURA TREVELYAN, BBC: Well,
Gwen, by the young
20-something Cubans who I have
been talking
to, with tremendous excitement.
As one young Afro-Cuban said to
me: "Obama
is change. That's what he
represents."
And the young Cubans that I have
been talking
to have been very struck by the
difference
between what they see as the
young American
president and, of course, their
own president,
Raul Castro, who is in his 80s.
So there is
a sense that his visit
represents a new era,
that people feel that this is a
new beginning
that, after almost 60 years of a
hostile relationship
with a superpower just 90 miles
away from
here, that now this is exciting,
that there
are endless possibilities for
young people
to study.
But there is a generational
change there,
too, Gwen. And I think, for
parents of these
20-somethings, this is a
difficult moment
for them, because they have
grown up with
a one-party state, with the
system as it is,
and they wonder what the change
will bring.
GWEN IFILL: But what is the
practical effect
of the hope and the change that
you're talking
about? When we saw two
presidents side by
side today, there was clearly --
there are
clearly wide areas of
disagreement between
them that are not just
generational.
LAURA TREVELYAN: Absolutely.
But one of the practical effects
of change
is that, for example, there are
cranes up
all over Havana. Some of the
hotels which
were playgrounds for wealthy
Americans in
the 1950s are now being
refurbished, because,
of course, for so many Caribbean
items, tourism
is a lifeline, particularly
American tourism.
And it could be the same for
Cuba, especially
with 110 direct flights a day
due to be coming
here from later in the year. So,
I have been
talking to Cubans who, for
example, for the
last year have been able to rent
out their
homes through Airbnb, that
American service
on the Internet where you let
out your homes
to people.
Now, Cubans for years have been
letting out
their rooms. They call it casas
particulares,
but now it's on the Web. Here in
Havana, there
2,500 homes that are being
rented out on Airbnb.
And people are so pleased to
have the extra
money, because the average Cuban
wage is about
25 U.S. dollars a month.
Through Airbnb, the average
amount you get
from a stay is $250. So, there
is a huge change
for people who regularly
complain that they
just do not have enough money to
live on.
GWEN IFILL: Yet, when the two
presidents talk
about -- admit that they have --
still have
profound differences between the
two nations,
does that trickle down at all to
ordinary
Cubans?
LAURA TREVELYAN: Well, most
certainly.
As someone who's lived in
America 12 years,
coming here to Havana, Cuba,
what strikes
you is that this is a one-party
state, that
broadcasting is
state-controlled.
So, for example, this morning,
on morning
television, there was respectful
TV coverage
of the Obama visit, pictures of
the Obama
girls under an umbrella,
pictures of Michelle
coming down from Air Force One.
But the tone is
state-controlled. And it was
made clear in the coverage that
Guantanamo
Bay is something that will be
raised. And
then, of course, related to that
is the fact
that there isn't freedom of
information here,
because the Internet service is
terrible.
One of the changes that Raul
Castro has introduced,
is there is more public Wi-Fi in
public parks,
but Cubans have to pay for it.
And the young
Cubans that I have been speaking
to, their
biggest wish is that the
Internet service
could be better, so that they
could be online,
so they can use Facebook, they
can use Twitter,
they can use e-mail.
They just feel that their lives
are so restricted.
As one young Cuban said to me,
"Knowledge
is power, and without the
Internet, we can't
have the information we need to
make choices
about our lives."
GWEN IFILL: It's something,
watching change
happen right before our eyes.
Laura Trevelyan reporting for
the BBC and
for us from Havana tonight,
thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we turn to
analysis of
today's historic meeting in
Havana and of
the president's trip to Cuba.
For that, I'm joined by Maria de
Los Angeles
Torres, director of the
Inter-University Program
for Latino Research and a
professor at the
University of Illinois, Chicago.
And Roger
Noriega of the American
Enterprise Institute.
He's a former assistant
secretary of state
for Western Hemisphere affairs
in the George
W. Bush administration.
And we welcome you both.
Roger Noriega, to you first.
What's your impression so far of
how this
trip is going?
ROGER NORIEGA, Former U.S.
Assistant Secretary
of State: Well, it was a little
clumsy today,
I think, the very awkward press
conference.
But I can understand the
excitement of the
Cuban people that was described
by your previous
guest. You know, there is
something sort of
exotic about Cuba. People
haven't been able
to travel there in a long time.
It's a tropical
island. It has a shortages of
fish and tropical
fruit. Something clearly is
wrong there.
But, on the other hand, the
people aren't
that different than people
anywhere. And they
-- you know, why would anybody
choose to be
in a dictatorship? Why wouldn't
they choose
democracy? Because the
government has a totalitarian
hold on every aspect of their
lives.
And that worries me, because the
government,
in the final analysis, will have
the say of
whether the economic opening
achieves any
sort of meaningful change or
whether the people
are going to be left
disappointed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maria Torres,
what's your sense
of the trip so far?
MARIA DE LOS ANGELES TORRES,
University of
Illinois at Chicago: Well, for
not only for
Cubans on the island, but I
think for Cubans
like myself that came to the
United States
as young children, this has been
very moving.
And it is historic, even though
that is a
very overused word when we speak
about Cuba.
I would like to just remind all
of us that
this is not the first time that
we have had
a rapprochement with Cuba. In
1978, Jimmy
Carter also opened the door. In
fact, there
was another historic moment in
which a Cuban
airline landed in Atlanta and
took over 100
Cuban Americans to dialogue with
the Cuban
government.
Actually, that was my first trip
back to Cuba.
We were very excited at the
time. We thought
that there could be change.
There was 3,600
political prisoners that were
released, and,
in fact, small businesses were
opened up at
the time.
But what happened was that it
got out of control
and the Cuban government opened
up the floodgates,
and at the same time clamped
down. And after
that came Reagan. So, I am
hopeful, to the
extent that I think this is a
little bit more,
if you will, assertive
rapprochement on the
part of President Obama, but we
still need
to remember it is a military
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Roger Noriega, do
you think
this time will be different? Do
you see something
materially different this time?
Obviously,
the president's there, but what
do you believe
could come from this?
ROGER NORIEGA: Well, certainly,
that's very
dramatic. The president's made a
big bet on
this in terms of his legacy in
history.
Unfortunately, if he loses that
bet, it's
going to be 11 million Cubans
that pay the
price, because by licensing
deals, as he has,
tractor factory and...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Business deals.
ROGER NORIEGA: .... hotels being
-- several
hotels being managed, these are
deals that
he's licensed with entities that
are owned
and operated by the Cuban
military.
So, in a certain way, you know,
we sort of
counted on the actuarial table
to deal with
the Castro brothers, but by the
president
sort of not only giving the
political normalization
and legitimization, but also
this economic
engagement, it may actually
create a certain
momentum for transition in the
post-Castro
period to just more dictators.
And I think that would be
extraordinarily
tragic if that were to happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maria Torres,
could that be
an outcome of this, that the
communist regime
is strengthened by this, rather
than moving
toward -- in any way toward
democracy?
MARIA DE LOS ANGELES TORRES:
Well, I think
there's always -- that's a risk,
but I also
think that there's a couple of
factors that
are different this time around.
And that is, one, I think there
is support
on this side of the Florida
Strait. Many of
the businesses today in Cuba are
being fueled
by family members who are in
Miami. There
is -- that's a very porous
border. I think
that the Cuban government
realizes they do
not have Soviet Union or a
Venezuela or Brazil
or Chinese government that will
bail them
out this time around. And so,
therefore, they
are forced to make changes.
I don't think these are changes
that they
want to make. And they are, in
fact, very
modest changes, given the depth
of the crisis
in Cuba. But, nonetheless, I
think for those
who would like to be part of
whatever configuration
of a government there is after
the Castro
brothers, there is a sense that
they have
got to make some changes.
And one thing Cuba cannot do is
open up the
immigration floodgates, and so,
therefore,
it is internally that the
changes have to
be made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's pick
up on that
and pick up on the political
prisoner exchange
at today's news conference.
Roger Noriega, we saw President
Castro fire
back. He said, what political
prisoners? And
he said, give me a list and we
will release
them tonight.
What do you see going on there?
Because now
there are human rights
organizations saying,
we're going to put out the
names.
ROGER NORIEGA: Well, quite
frankly, I can
see why he would lose track of
the political
prisoners, because they take
them every day,
and the arrests were very
dramatic because
they were on the eve of the
president's visit,
the arrests yesterday of ladies
going to church,
Santeria Parish, as they do
every Sunday.
They are beaten up and roughed
up every Sunday
as well, so...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is just
on the eve
of President Obama arriving?
ROGER NORIEGA: Absolutely. And
that just sort
of affirms that the regime is
not going to
let up. And they have every
intention of holding,
you know, sort of restraining
any kind of
economical or political opening
that would
threaten its survival.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maria Torres, why
isn't that
a pretty discouraging
development here, that
there really is very little sign
so far of
their move toward democracy and
certainly
not toward doing anything about
these prisoners,
political prisoners?
MARIA DE LOS ANGELES TORRES: I
absolutely
agree.
I think one thing we have to
remember, change
doesn't necessarily mean it's
going to be
positive. And I think, with the
crumbling,
if you will, of totalitarian
regimes oftentimes
comes a moment of extreme
repression.
And I think that is why the fact
that Raul
Castro was asked on his own turf
about political
prisoners and about human rights
is something
that we normally don't see. And
I think that
that, regardless of how little
Internet there
is in Cuba and how little press
there is,
people in Cuba will know this by
tonight.
And so I think that that is --
in a sense,
that is creating another sense
of environment,
and in fact, I would say a sense
of empowerment.
The repression -- as one of the
leaders of
the human rights groups in Cuba
said today,
there is a lot of repression
because there
is a lot of democracy movement
on the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Roger Noriega, so
could there
be empowerment just by the very
fact that
they had the president's visit
and this news
conference, that people will ask
questions?
ROGER NORIEGA: I think this is a
very tough
totalitarian Stalinist regime,
as it's been
described to me by Eastern
Europeans who've
lived there, but it's also a
brittle regime,
in my way of thinking.
And I think that this is one
area. Can the
regime control expectations? If
that gets
out of hand, it will be a
serious problem.
But my concern is that, did the
president
strengthen Castro's hand by
accepting engagement
with Cuba on his terms?
The regime has made this a
binary choice.
You either engage the regime or
you engage
the people. And since
Eisenhower, presidents
have chosen not to engage the
people. And
I'm afraid that this sends the
wrong message,
and the president also making a
commitment,
a statement that he's not about
changing the
regime.
Well, why wouldn't he be? This
is a totalitarian
regime. Why wouldn't anybody be
for changing
that regime?
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're going to
have to leave
it there, but we thank you both
very much,
Roger Noriega, Maria de Los
Angeles Torres.
Thank you.
MARIA DE LOS ANGELES TORRES:
GWEN IFILL: Now to the race for
the White
House.
Ahead of tomorrow's primaries,
campaigns focused
on foreign policy, as candidates
stopped off
in the Capitol.
John Yang reports.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump spent
today in the
city he's railed against,
Washington, D.C.
One of his stops was just blocks
from the
Capitol, a midday, closed-door
meeting with
a select group of Republicans,
including former
House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
Trump made another
stop to talk, this time on the
record, to
The Washington Post editorial
board, unveiling
his team of foreign policy
advisers.
Alabama senator Jeff Sessions,
who has already
endorsed Trump, will lead the
group. Other
names include a former Pentagon
inspector-general,
an oil and energy consultant,
and a retired
Army lieutenant general who
helped oversee
Iraq after the U.S. invasion.
In the afternoon, he warned
Republicans who
are vowing to stop him not to
organize a third-party
run.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Well, a third party means that
the Democrats
are going to win, almost
certainly. You can't
be that spiteful. You can't be
that spiteful,
because you will destroy the
country.
JOHN YANG: Trump held his news
conference
at a hotel development in
downtown Washington.
That allowed him to talk about
the jobs he's
creating, and also show it off
to the press.
Trump's two remaining Republican
rivals, Ted
Cruz and John Kasich, were also
in town, at
the annual conference hosted by
AIPAC, the
pro-Israel lobbying group. It
was the Democratic
front-runner, Hillary Clinton,
who spoke first.
She zeroed in on Trump, saying
he couldn't
be trusted.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Yes, we need steady hands, not a
president
who says he's neutral on Monday,
pro-Israel
on Tuesday and who knows what on
Wednesday,
because everything's negotiable.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, my
friends,
Israel's security is
non-negotiable.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: After the speech,
Clinton headed
to Arizona for campaigning. The
only candidate
to skip AIPAC? Bernie Sanders,
the race's
only Jewish candidate. He spent
the day campaigning
in Arizona, Idaho and Utah,
which hold contests
tomorrow.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
GWEN IFILL: For more on how the
candidates
are positioning themselves with
interest groups
and with voters, we turn to
Politics Monday,
with Tamara Keith of NPR, and
Stuart Rothenberg
of The Rothenberg & Gonzales
Political Report.
Tam, let's talk about that
Hillary Clinton
speech at AIPAC. First of all,
for people
who don't know, the American
Israel Public
Affairs Committee, what is it
and why is their
support significant? Why is
everybody lining
up, except for Bernie Sanders,
to be there
today?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
and I will say that Bernie
Sanders did give
a foreign policy speech tonight
in Utah at
a gymnasium at a high school.
It is a very significant Israeli
lobbying
group, a significant --
basically, you want
AIPAC on your side, generally
speaking, if
you're a politician in America.
It's just
-- it's easier that way. And
it's a political
force.
And Hillary Clinton came out,
really, I think,
with a general election posture.
She came
out swinging at Donald Trump in
a significant
way. That was one clip. She came
out later
in the speech and talked about,
you know,
not standing by as intolerance
and bullying
happens.
So she used that speech. She
used stronger
language than she has used,
though she's been
using increasingly stronger
language toward
Trump.
GWEN IFILL: So, what is it that
AIPAC can
do for candidates, and then this
particular
group of candidates? Because
John Kasich was
there this afternoon. He gave a
very strong
speech, standing ovation.
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The
Rothenberg & Gonzales Political
Report: Well,
let's remember AIPAC is not a
political action
committee in the sense that
other political
groups are. They give money to
candidates.
They endorse candidates. They do
political
activity.
They don't do that. It's
American Israel Public
Affairs Committee.
GWEN IFILL: That's right. That's
right. Good
catch.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And they do
is introduce
candidates to pro-Israel voters,
mostly Jewish
voters, in an attempt to
generate support
for Israel.
But, look, if you're at AIPAC,
you are going
to meet contributors. you are
going to meet
people who want to decide what
candidate to
support. Israel is a key issue.
So, AIPAC
is a really important advocate
for Israel,
but in that regard, it has
strong support
in the Jewish community, not
throughout the
Jewish community.
There is another group, J
Street, which is
more...
GWEN IFILL: More liberal?
STUART ROTHENBERG: ... more
critical, more
critical of Israeli domestic
policy.
But AIPAC has a lot of groups
around the country,
a lot of supporters. It is a
great place to
go if you're going to talk about
U.S.-Israel
relations.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
Let's stick with Donald Trump
for a while.
He was in Washington today not
only to meet
with AIPAC, but also to meet
with -- at least
it was billed as a meeting with
establishment
Republicans.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: But that didn't --
didn't exactly
live up to that.
STUART ROTHENBERG: No. This was
another case
where the billing, I think, was
off.
Right. We expected this to be
Republican insiders,
veteran party strategists,
long-term GOP maybe
money folks. No, it was
basically mostly people
who had already endorse him,
members from
the Hill, Tom Reed of New York,
Duncan Hunter
of California, a number of...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Jeff Sessions.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Jeff Sessions
of Alabama,
as well as a couple of other
Republicans who
hadn't, Jim DeMint, now the head
of the Heritage
Foundation.
It was very odd in that he
seemed to be talking
to the choir there, not reaching
out to moderate,
pragmatic Republicans and party
insiders,
which is I thought he probably
needed to do
and probably he was going to do.
GWEN IFILL: Does that mean this
pivot to being
embraced by the mainstream
Republican Party
is not quite all the way there
yet?
TAMARA KEITH: It's not there
yet.
The stages of denial of the
Republican establishment
are ongoing and they haven't
moved on to acceptance
in a lot of ways. And Donald
Trump held that
meeting. Again, it wasn't a
broad meeting.
It wasn't, you know, going to
the Senate Republican
Caucus and doing the lunches.
Actually, the Senate is out of
town. I think
it happens to be that Donald
Trump was in
town for AIPAC, and this press
conference
at the hotel, and he had a
meeting with a
few people, and it got big
billing.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
this pivot, this
general election pivot, because
both Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump would
like it if
we didn't talk about Ted Cruz or
John Kasich,
who are still -- and Bernie
Sanders, who are
still out there.
Is that what they're using this
little interregnum
for?
TAMARA KEITH: They're definitely
making that
shift. But it's not done. It's
definitely
not done on...
GWEN IFILL: In part because, for
instance,
Bernie Sanders outraised Hillary
Clinton.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, absolutely.
We got the
February numbers, and he
outraised her by
something like $12 million or
something. He
raised more than $40 million.
She raised more
in the $30 million range.
Interestingly, though, she ends
February with
more cash on hand than he does,
and he actually
spent significantly more money.
He outspent
her by about $10 million in
February. The
results of that were not
immediately apparent,
given Super Tuesday, given what
just happened
semi,sort of Super Tuesday last
Tuesday, where
he didn't win any of those
states.
So, it's -- but Bernie Sanders
is sticking
it out and he is able to raise a
lot of money,
so he is not ready in any way to
make that
turn. One quick interesting
thing, Elizabeth
Warren, Senator Elizabeth Warren
today went
on a massive tweet storm,
calling Donald Trump
a loser, among other things.
But she has moved on. She hasn't
endorsed
anyone in the Democratic race,
but she has
begun attacking the Republican
front-runner.
GWEN IFILL: And I would just say
what Donald
Trump's response is, but it
would require
too much explanation.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: So, let's talk a
little bit more
about that, though.
You have Elizabeth Warren
calling him a loser,
clearly trying to stir the pot.
You have more
primaries coming up tomorrow.
What are we
all watching for now?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, we have
two. We have
the Utah caucuses and the
Arizona primary
on the Republican side.
Donald Trump has had the
advantage in Arizona.
There isn't a lot of polling in
either state,
Gwen, so we're kind of feeling
our way through
this, not that the surveys have
always been
accurate anyway.
GWEN IFILL: True.
STUART ROTHENBERG: But in this
case, I think
the endorsements, former
Governor Jan Brewer,
a number of other elected
officials in Arizona
have endorsed Trump. We're kind
of assuming
that he's the favorite there,
and going to
win, although Ted Cruz is
running well apparently
in what limited polling we have.
In Utah, on the other hand,
though, it's all
about Ted Cruz, and will he get
50 percent?
As it turns out, Donald Trump's
personality,
style, criticism of Mitt Romney,
language
has alienated a lot of LDS
Mormon voters.
And right now, it appears that
Ted Cruz is
the overwhelming favorite there.
Trump is playing around. Kasich
is playing
around to try to keep Cruz under
50 percent.
If Cruz exceeds 50 percent in
Utah, he gets
all of the delegates. It's like
a winner-take-all.
So there is still some
maneuvering going on
here.
GWEN IFILL: A lot of
maneuvering.
STUART ROTHENBERG: The two
states are likely,
most likely, at least we think,
most likely
to divide between the two
candidates, which
would, in a sense, I guess, keep
the race
as Trump the front-runner, Cruz
the contender,
and John Kasich still looking to
win a race
other than Ohio.
GWEN IFILL: And Bernie Sanders
obviously deciding
there is something to be gotten
out West at
this point.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely, there
is. And he
is about to begin, most likely,
a very decent
run, possibly a very good run of
states that
really favor him.
GWEN IFILL: Tamara Keith, Stu
Rothenberg,
thank you both very much.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Gwen.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
living in a city
targeted by terrorists; and
celebrating 50
years of music in a
world-renowned jazz club.
But, first, we return to Latin
America, and
efforts to end the world's
longest-running
conflict, in Colombia.
In Havana today, Secretary of
State John Kerry
met with negotiators ahead of a
Wednesday
deadline for Colombia's peace
talks. It included
a meeting with the main rebel
faction, the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or
FARC.
Last month, I sat down with
Colombian President
Juan Manuel Santos to discuss
his peace initiative.
Tonight, the view from the rebel
side, in
Putumayo, deep in Colombia's
south.
Special correspondents Bruno
Federico and
Nadja Drost recently traveled
there for this
exclusive report before the
Colombian government
banned reporters from events
like what you're
about to see.
The story is narrated by Ms.
Drost.
NADJA DROST: Beyond the end of
the road, the
Caqueta River winds deep into
Putumayo. There's
endless jungle and the FARC.
After decades of cloaking their
movements
to evade the military, these
rebels are emerging
from the jungle. It's for no
small reason:
In light of an expected peace
deal, the government
of President Juan Manuel Santos
has pulled
back its forces temporarily from
the area
to allow FARC commanders in
Havana to travel
here to talk peace directly with
their troops.
RAMIRO, FARC (through
translator): We had
the idea to do this out of a
necessity, so
that people, the guerrilla and
our communities,
can learn what is happening, so
that people
have a hand in the peace
process.
NADJA DROST: Hundreds of
guerrillas gather
for a landmark event on the road
towards peace.
The FARC have also invited the
people they
have lived among for decades,
and us, the
only foreign TV crew, to witness
the biggest
gathering of rebels and
civilians in over
a decade.
We have been following units of
the FARC over
the last year, traveling to
their camps camouflaged
in the jungle. Now it's the
first time seeing
them outside of their
clandestine life. After
years of discreetly moving
through villages,
it's a rare and exceptional
sight to see dozens
of them walking in town
alongside civilians,
as everyone prepares for the
events.
WOMAN (through translator): It's
important
because it might help clarify
doubts that
many people have.
NADJA DROST: It's no wonder
people have doubts;
50 years of conflict have killed
nearly a
quarter-million people, and
displaced some
six million. Another 40,000 are
the disappeared.
Crimes have been committed by
all parties:
guerrilla groups, government
forces, and right-wing
paramilitary groups who often
acted as a proxy
for the state. The FARC started
out in the
1960s as small groups of armed
peasants defending
the rights of the poor. It
became a Marxist
insurgency that later bolstered
its forces
using the drug trade,
kidnappings and extortion
to finance its their fight.
Since 2000, the Colombian
military, backed
by billions of U.S. dollars, has
decimated
the FARC, and their ranks have
dropped to
an estimated 7,000 rebels today.
It was a
weakened, but undefeated FARC
that came to
the negotiating table.
Joaquin Gomez, the nom de guerre
for the commander
of the FARC's powerful southern
bloc, got
safe passage from Havana to
visit home. Alexandra
Narino, also an alias, has
returned with him.
A Dutch woman famous for being a
foreign rebel,
she's wanted in the U.S. for her
role in the
kidnapping of three American
military contractors
in 2003. They're big names here,
and across
Colombia, but rarely have they
shown their
faces in the territory they call
home.
People gather to ask the FARC if
what they
hear about the peace process is
true.
MAN (through translator): Will
there really
be a peace agreement signed by
March 23?
JOAQUIN GOMEZ, FARC (through
translator):
This is not possible. It's not
possible because
the government has to fulfill a
series of
commitments that, until now, it
hasn't.
NADJA DROST: Despite more than
three years
of negotiations, Gomez says
there are many
sticking points that have yet to
be resolved,
like how the FARC would disarm
and concentrate
their troops in rural areas, and
one of them
is a key demand by the FARC:
JOAQUIN GOMEZ (through
translator): That paramilitarism
ends as a state policy. That's
it, that they
get rid of it. It's the only
obstacle that
exists, because, while it
exists, it's like
walking with one foot in the
grave.
NADJA DROST: Gomez and other
rebels worry
that if the FARC become a purely
political
organization, they will meet the
same fate
as thousands of activists,
social and political
leaders who have been
assassinated.
If the FARC are to disarm, Gomez
says the
state should stop using its
weapons as a tool
of political repression.
JOAQUIN GOMEZ (through
translator): That would
mean that weapons of the state
aren't used
in assassinations of political
leaders, trade
unionists, or leftists. And our
weapons would
be kept at a distance from us.
We propose
that a third country hold on to
them.
NADJA DROST: While the presence
of the guerrilla
is feared in various regions,
the vacuum of
their absence worries many
locals.
LILIANA, Colombia (through
translator): At
the point of signing a peace
agreement, which
we support, we will feel very
worried, because,
with living in a conflict zone,
paramilitaries
may come in and disappear us,
one by one,
or kill us, and who will protect
us? With
the FARC here, one feels a
security that that
won't happen.
JOAQUIN GOMEZ (through
translator): What is
being sought is reconciliation.,
not impunity,
but reconciliation.
NADJA DROST: Commander Joaquin
Gomez faces
narco-trafficking charges in the
U.S. and
a $2.5 million reward for his
capture. In
Colombia, he's wanted for the
kidnapping and
assassination of a governor.
JOAQUIN GOMEZ (through
translator): There
has to be a general amnesty,
except for crimes
against humanity. And there has
to be a form
of justice that isn't punitive,
but restorative.
NADJA DROST: A peace agreement
will call all
parties to the conflict, the
FARC, as much
as members of the state and
military, to face
a special justice system that
offers alternative
sentences. Most of the FARC's
rank-and-file
will receive amnesties, and for
when they
do, some are being trained to
use new tools
for political communication.
BORIS, FARC (through
translator): We're preparing
ourselves here for political
battle, to get
ready for a new environment. We
will pick
up cameras and drop our arms.
NADJA DROST: Welcoming the
prospect of peace,
but wary of the uncertainties to
come.
ALEXANDRA NARINO, FARC (through
translator):
When a peace accord is signed,
that doesn't
mean that peace starts. The
silencing of weapons
isn't peace. I think it's
afterwards that
the difficult part starts. And
the most interesting
part, the construction of peace
with social
justice, I want to be there.
NADJA DROST: For tonight, an air
of optimism
and hope takes over, as one step
of many is
taken on the long and difficult
road to peace.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
reporting with Bruno
Federico, I'm Nadja Drost in
Putumayo, Colombia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Extraordinary
reporting.
And later this week, we will
look at how Colombia's
massive cocaine trade could be
affected by
a peace agreement.
GWEN IFILL: Now back to terror
in Turkey.
The attack on a pedestrian
street in Istanbul
on Sunday, the fourth suicide
bombing in Turkey
this year, was, according to
President Erdogan,
one of the biggest and bloodiest
terrorist
waves in its history.
We take an intimate look now at
the violence,
and how it shapes daily life.
Decorated Marine veteran Elliot
Ackerman served
in Iraq and Afghanistan. His
debut novel,
"Green on Blue," is a war story
told from
the perspective of an Afghan
boy. Ackerman
now lives with his family in
Istanbul.
ELLIOT ACKERMAN, Author, "Green
on Blue":
On an unseasonably warm morning
the past January
in Istanbul, an Islamic State
suicide bomber
detonated himself in a
Sultanahmet, a central
sightseeing district.
He killed eleven tourists, 10 of
them Germans.
At the moment of the blast, I
was sitting
in an outside cafe nearby.
Almost immediately,
my phone lit up with concerned
calls from
friends and family back home in
the U.S.
This was the third Islamic State
bombing in
Turkey since June. I had moved
to Istanbul
two years before with my family
to work on
a book. But I had also moved
here to give
my children the experience of
living abroad.
What better place to expand
their world view
than Istanbul? It's a city
defined by its
divisions, by Bosphorus Strait
that splits
Europe from Asia and by its
religious history,
having once been the seat of
power for both
Christian and Islamic empires.
One of my fondest memories is of
the spring
we moved here. That's when the
tulips are
in bloom. They blossom
everywhere, in long
rows along the streets, in
planters tucked
into the city squares, even
sprouting up through
the broken sidewalks.
I spent those months watching my
children
explore this ancient city among
its new flowers.
The night after the bombing, I
went out to
dinner with a few Turkish
friends. Among them
a well-known journalist. Weeks
before, the
authorities had imprisoned two
of his colleagues
for spying and revealing state
secrets after
they printed a story about
government collusion
with Islamic fighters inside of
Syria.
When the topic of the bombing
came up, he
said that he was far more afraid
of Turkey's
more increasingly toxic politics
around the
issue of terrorism than of
terrorism itself.
Politics, he said, can be
defined as the acquisition
or maintenance of power. You can
do this in
two ways, by either dividing
people or uniting
them.
Uniting people is very
difficult, he explained.
But dividing them is far easier.
When I asked
how you divide people, his
answer was a single
word: fear.
We then speculated about why the
bombing had
taken place in Sultanahmet,
close to the famous
Blue Mosque. The bomber could
have killed
far more people if he had
attacked a subway
station at rush hour or a
shopping mall. Consensus
was that the Islamic State
wanted to harm
the tourist industry.
When I remembered all of the
concerned phone
calls I had received from home,
it seemed
likely that fewer and fewer
Westerners would
be planning their vacations to
the city.
Then the man at the table next
interrupted
us. He owned a hotel in
Sultanahmet, and told
us that a wonderful and
surprising thing had
happened after the bombing. In a
small act
of defiance and solidarity,
German vacationers
had booked his hotel to
capacity. They had
chosen not to be afraid.
Much of current U.S. politics is
defined by
the rhetoric of fear. Whether
the topic is
terrorism, gun control or
immigration, our
fears are manipulated. We are
encouraged to
be divided.
The longer I stay in Istanbul,
the more I
realize that the education I'm
giving my children
is not so much as cultural, but
moral. It's
about teaching them to live
without fear.
And that is a choice, but not an
easy one.
I have a photo from that first
spring in Istanbul.
It's of my daughter. She stands
in a bed of
yellow tulips in the shadow of
the ancient
Blue Mosque. She wears a little
pink coat.
And she's looking at the
flowers. She's not
even 4 years old.
When I look at it, I feel that
sweet ache
in my heart, the one any father
recognizes
when he looks at his daughter. I
also feel
such joy for all she is
experiencing so young.
But two years after this picture
was taken,
looking at it also presents with
me a choice.
I can see something different in
it if I choose.
You see, this photograph was
taken exactly
where the bomb went off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
it's Monday night,
and for 50 years that's meant
big band music
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
it's Monday night,
and for 50 years that's meant
big band music
at a world-famous jazz club in
New York.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: The song is
called "Mean What
You Say. And, says trombonist
Douglas Purviance,
it's a veritable lesson in big
band music.
DOUGLAS PURVIANCE, Musician: It
starts out,
it just a rhythm section, and
then it adds
and adds and adds until it's
really coming
at you.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a sound
that, every Monday
night, comes at audiences at the
famous Village
Vanguard jazz club. In a dark
basement space
in Lower Manhattan, the Vanguard
is a jazz
mecca.
All the greats have played here,
and some
of the most renowned live
recordings have
been made here. The club was
founded in 1935
by Max Gordon, and 81 years
later, it's still
a family affair, run now by his
daughter Deborah
Gordon, and still not your
average small business.
DEBORAH GORDON, Village
Vanguard: I was looking
for just a recent payroll sheet
or something,
and accidentally put my hand on
one from 1962
with John Coltrane's signature
on the bottom.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
DEBORAH GORDON: Things like that
are part
of the fabric of the place.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you realize
how unusual
that is, right? I mean, not many
places...
DEBORAH GORDON: I do. I'm not
going to tell
you where it is.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: The Vanguard
recently celebrated
an important part of its
history: a 50-years-and-counting
residency that blows the lid off
the place
every Monday night.
It began in 1966 as the Thad
Jones/Mel Lewis
Orchestra. Jones was a trumpeter
and composer
who'd played with Count Basie,
Lewis a veteran
drummer. Big bands weren't then
in vogue.
The economics were too
difficult, for one
thing.
But the two gathered some of New
York's best
studio and session musicians for
what many
thought would be a one-time gig,
held on a
night that jazz clubs are
usually closed.
JIMMY OWENS, Musician: I took
the taxicab
here, and when I got to 11th
Street, I saw
all of these people lined up
outside of the
Vanguard. I mean, I know we're
playing here
tonight, but I have never seen a
crowd like
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Trumpet player
Jimmy Owens
and trombonist Garnett Brown
were part of
the original group, which is
credited with
recreating the big band sound.
The thing that made this band
really different
at this day in age was the fact
that Thad's
writing, he wasn't writing big
band music,
per se, compositions. He was
like writing
small group compositions, only
for the big
band.
GARNETT BROWN, Musician: They
had those times
when the band as one unit would
just knock
everybody out because everybody
was so in
synch. And then Thad would rely
on the solos
and knowing exactly what to do
in order to
make the soloists rise higher in
his emotion
and playing.
JEFFREY BROWN: "All My
Yesterdays," a newly-released
recording of the band's debut
sessions, captures
the original sound and
excitement.
ZEV FELDMAN, Resonance Records:
This is one
of great traditions in jazz
music.
JEFFREY BROWN: Zev Feldman is
with Resonance
Records.
ZEV FELDMAN: When I'm listening
to this music,
I hear a fresh energy amongst
the musicians
on the stage. You hear the
energy within the
applause of that room. We built
a time machine
that can take you back to what
it was like
on that opening night.
JEFFREY BROWN: Most amazing of
all perhaps,
the band and its Monday night
tradition have
continued. It's been called the
Vanguard Jazz
Orchestra since the death of Mel
Lewis in
1990.
The 17 musicians, crowded on the
Vanguard's
small stage, make their livings
from teaching,
playing in Broadway shows and
other work.
Monday nights are different.
Because this isn't a living for
anybody, right?
JOHN MOSCA, Musician: Depends on
how you live.
No.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: These days,
trombonists John
Mosca and Douglas Purviance
serve, respectively,
as the band's director and
manager.
DOUGLAS PURVIANCE: This whole
phenomenon is
about the music. And it's about,
you know,
the quality of the arrangements
and the compositions.
So, Thad Jones is the core of
what we do.
And we have always tried to add
other composers
and arrangers on that level,
which is not
an easy thing to do.
JOHN MOSCA: We feel about our
book the way
classical musicians would feel
about the repertoire
of Haydn and Mozart and
Beethoven. You can
never really master it. It just
-- it demands
everything you have.
JEFFREY BROWN: So it's possible
to keep going?
JOHN MOSCA: Yes. People are
always going to
want to do this. And this music
is a great
teacher.
JEFFREY BROWN: From the Village
Vanguard,
make that live from the Village
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: A superhero
comic series is opening up new
conversations
about mental health and
postpartum depression.
The mother of Marvel comics'
Daredevil reveals
the long-kept secret of why she
left her young
son. Read about the Netflix
series on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
the cast and crew of the
Broadway musical
"Hamilton." Got to watch.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will look at how
to help the
400,000 kids in foster care in
the U.S. beat
the odds stacked against them.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.